COME EASY – GO EASY

  JAMES HADLEY

  CHASE

  COPYRIGHT © 1960

  CHAPTER ONE

  I

  An emergency call came in at five minutes to eleven, just when I was getting ready to leave. If it had come in five minutes later I could have safely ignored it, but with still five minutes to go before official closing time, I was stuck with it.

  The night telephone was hooked to a tape recorder that automatically began recording when the telephone bell rang. It was part of this Big-Brother-is-watching-you efficiency system we have.

  I picked up the receiver.

  "Lawrence Safes Corporation—night service," I said.

  "This is Henry Cooper." One of those well fed, arrogant voices that come out of owners of vast incomes and super-de-luxe penthouses. "How fast can you get a man to me? I'm in trouble with my safe."

  I thought: here goes my evening with Janey. This makes the third time this month I've had to stand her up.

  "Where are you, sir?" I said, keeping my voice polite because the tape was recording, and I had already been in trouble for snarling at a customer.

  "Ashley Arms. I want a man down here right away."

  I looked at the clock on the desk. It was two minutes to eleven. If I told him the night service had shut down, I would get the gate. The way I was fixed for money, that was a luxury I couldn't afford.

  "Can you tell me what is wrong with the safe, sir?"

  "I've mislaid the key. Get a man down here fast!"

  He banged down the receiver and I banged down mine.

  I had promised Janey I would pick her up at eleven-fifteen. We had planned to go dancing at a club that had recently opened. She would be dressed and waiting. Ashley Arms was at the other side of the town. By the time I got there, opened this goddamn safe, got back and parked the van, taken a trolley to her place it would be half-past twelve. I couldn't imagine Janey waiting for me that long. She had told me the next time I stood her up would be the last.

  I couldn't telephone her from the office. Private calls weren't allowed. There was a phone booth down the road. I would have to call her from there.

  I grabbed my tool kit, locked up and went out to the truck. It was beginning to rain and I hadn't a raincoat. The traffic was heavy and there was nowhere to park when I reached the phone booth. It took me ten minutes circling around before some guy pulled out and I could leave the truck.

  It was twenty minutes past eleven when I dialled Janey's number. She answered right away as if she had been sitting by the telephone waiting for me to call up and tell her the date was off.

  As soon as I started to explain, she hit the ceiling.

  "If you can't come, then I know someone who can," she said. "I warned you, Chet. This is the last time. I'm sick and tired of you breaking dates with me. This is the last time!"

  "But Janey, I can't help . . ."

  But I was talking on a dead line. She had hung up on me.

  I dialled her number again, but she didn't answer. I let the bell ring for a couple of minutes, then I cut the connection and went out to the truck.

  To make matters worse, it was now raining fit to drown a duck. I drove over to Ashley Arms in a mood of black depression. I cursed the Lawrence Safes Corporation. I cursed Mr. Henry Cooper and I cursed myself for not bringing a raincoat with me, knowing I would have to walk home after I had taken the truck back to the depot and the rain would ruin my best suit that wasn't much anyway.

  Ashley Arms was a big apartment block in the best residential district of the town.

  I walked into the lobby and over to the doorman's office. He told me I would find Mr. Cooper's apartment on the third floor.

  Henry Cooper was tall and bulky, and very, very arrogant. He had a purple complexion of a heavy drinker and a waist-line of a solid eater. He opened the front door himself, and as soon as I stepped into the hall he began to yell at me for taking so long to get out there.

  I said the traffic was bad and I was sorry. This he brushed aside, and still muttering, he led the way into a luxuriously furnished lounge.

  He walked over to an oil painting of a fat woman in the nude that looked good enough to be an original Rubens, but probably wasn't, and swung the painting on its hinges aside. Behind it was one of our super-de-luxe wall safes.

  As I was setting down my tool kit, I became aware of a girl lying full length on the settee. She was in a white evening dress cut so low I could see the tops of her breasts. She was leafing through a magazine, a cigarette between her full red lips, and she glanced up and stared curiously at me.

  She reminded me a little of Janey. She had the same coloured hair and the same long, slender legs, but there the resemblance ended. This girl had a lot of class whereas Janey had no class at all. Janey had a provocative shape, personality and a duck tail walk that made men stare after her, but it was all pretty brash. There was nothing brash about this girl.

  "How soon can you open it?" Cooper demanded. "I'm in a hurry."

  With a conscious effort I shifted my eyes from the girl and went over to the safe.

  "Not long, sir, if you will give me the combination."

  He scribbled the combination down on a scrap of paper and gave it to me. Then he went over to the cellarette and began to fix himself a highball. As I started work on the safe, I heard a telephone bell ring somewhere in the apartment.

  "I guess that'll be Jack," Cooper said to the girl and he went out of the room, leaving the door open.

  The girl said softly, "Hurry it up, buster. The old stinker has promised me a pearl necklace. I'm all in a lather he might change his mind."

  That really jolted me. She was looking directly at me and there was a cold glitter in her eyes, the kind of glitter Janey had sometimes when she was after something from me she thought might be hard to get.

  "This won't take me three minutes," I said. "Just relax."

  In less than that time I had the safe open.

  "Some safe!" she said. "Why, a kid could open it!"

  I was looking inside the safe. Stacked on three shelves were packets of hundred dollar bills. I've never seen so much money. I couldn't make a guess how much there was—probably half a million dollars.

  The girl slid off the settee and joined me by the safe. I could smell her perfume and her arm touched mine: that was how close we were together.

  "Aladdin's Cave!" she said breathlessly. "Oh boy! Wouldn't it be nice to help ourselves!"

  I heard the tinkle of the telephone bell, warning me Cooper had finished speaking. It warned the girl too for she hurriedly returned to the settee.

  I shut the safe door as Cooper came into the room.

  "Haven't you got it open yet?" he barked at me.

  "One second, sir," I said and clicked back the lock. "It's open now."

  He tried the safe door, opening it only a few inches, then he grunted.

  "You'd better get me a duplicate key."

  I said I would do that I packed my tools and started for the door.

  I said good-night to the girl on the settee. She just nodded to me. At the front door Cooper gave me a couple of dollars. He gave them grudgingly. He said if ever he needed service in the future for me to give it faster than this time. He told me not to forget the duplicate key.

  As I drove back to the depot, I thought about the money in Cooper's safe.

  For years now I had been dissatisfied with the money I had been earning. For years I had realised I was never going to get anywhere in this job of mine.

  I thought what I could do with that money if it were mine. I thought how easy it would be to break into that apartment, open that sardine can of a safe and help myself.

  I told myself I wasn't going
to do it, but the thought stayed with me. It was still with me the following night when Roy Tracey came in to relieve me.

  I had known Roy most of my life. We had gone to school together, and his father had put him to work with the Lawrence Safes Corporation the same day my father had the same bright idea for me.

  In appearance Roy was a lot like me: he was tall and dark and heavily built. He wore a pencil line moustache that gave him an Italian look. He had the same itch for money as I had.

  Unlike me, women had no place in his life. He had been married when he was nineteen, but it hadn't worked out. The girl had left him after a year and that finished women for him. His one mania was playing the horses. He was always short of money and was always trying to borrow off me.

  I told him about Cooper's money.

  We were alone together in the office. It was raining hard, and rain streamed down the windows. I was in no hurry to get home. I told Roy about the girl in Cooper's apartment and how I had opened the safe.

  "At a guess there's around half a million in hundred dollar bills," I said, wandering around the office while Roy sat at the desk, smoking. "Imagine owning that kind of money."

  "Some guys have all the luck."

  "Yeah." I went to the window and stared out into the wet night. "Well, I guess I'll go home. Some night!"

  "Don't run away," Roy said. "A half a million? As much as that?"

  "It can't be less. There were three shelves of it."

  "Sit down. Let's talk about it." We looked at each other. There was a tense expression in his eyes. "I could use money like that, Chet."

  I sat down. My heart was beginning to thump.

  "So could I."

  "I'm in the hole for five hundred bucks," he said. "I've got to get some money. Look, suppose we knock this safe off?" He tilted back his chair, staring at me. "It sounds a soft touch."

  "It could be."

  There was a pause while we both stared at the rain, beating against the window.

  Finally, Roy said, "I've been waiting for a chance like this for some time. I'm fed up living the way I live. You've the same idea, haven't you?"

  "Yes."

  "Well, how about it? Do you want to do it?"

  "No, I don't want to do it, but it's got to be done. It's too easy to pass up."

  He grinned at me.

  "Don't look so scared. If we use our heads, we'll get away with it."

  I sat on the edge of the desk.

  "Yes."

  "Let's work on it. Let's talk about it."

  We spent the next hour making plans. The more we talked about it, the easier it seemed.

  "We've got to find out when this guy leaves his apartment. That's the one thing we must know," Roy said. "Once we know that, then we move in, open the safe and help ourselves. Here's what you do. You take the duplicate key he wants to his place and talk to the doorman. He'll tell you when Cooper is out. Doormen like to talk. He'll tell you if you handle him right." He blew smoke at me. "When we know he's out, we walk in and pick up the money."

  Put like that it seemed the simplest and easiest job in the world.

  II

  The next evening I went down to the Ashley Arms. I was wearing the Lawrence Safes Corporation uniform: a buff blouse, bottle green slacks and a peak cap with a badge.

  Roy had said he would meet me with the truck as soon as he was off duty. I get to the Ashley Arms a little after ten-thirty.

  The doorman was in his office, thumbing through a paperback, a bored expression on his face.

  He recognised me as I came into the lobby and nodded to me.

  "You again? If you're looking for Mr. Cooper you're unlucky. He's out."

  "When will he be back?" I asked, leaning up against the counter and taking out a pack of cigarettes.

  The doorman glanced up at the wall clock.

  "In half an hour."

  "I'll wait. I have a special delivery for him."

  "Leave it with me. I'll give it to him."

  I shook my head.

  "I can't do that. It's the key of his safe. I have to hand it to him personally and get a receipt."

  He shrugged his shoulders, taking the cigarette I offered him,

  "Please yourself."

  "Are you sure he'll be back in half an hour?"

  "Yeah. He never misses. He leaves here at eight and gets back at eleven."

  "Some guys are like that," I said. "You can set a clock by them."

  "He's one of them. He owns three night clubs. He checks them every night. Sundays included. He comes back here for dinner at eleven, then he goes out again around one o'clock to see the clubs shut down and count the loot. He never misses."

  "Are you on duty all night?" I asked casually.

  "I go off at one. After one, we lock up here. Everyone living here has a key." The doorman scowled. "You'd be surprised the number of times I get dragged out of bed because some dope has forgotten his key."

  This was falling right into my lap.

  "Cooper lost the key to his safe the other night," I said. "He loused up my evening."

  "A great guy for losing keys," the doorman said bitterly. "Only last week he lost his door key. He had me out of my bed at five o'clock in the morning for Pete's sweet sake!"

  "Is that the time he gets back?"

  "Yeah, then sleeps all day ... the way some guys live!"

  I now had the information I wanted. I casually changed the subject. We chewed the fat about this and that until Cooper came in.

  He came in a minute to eleven o'clock.

  I crossed the hall and met him half way.

  "I have the key to your safe, sir," I said.

  It took him a moment or so to recognise me.

  "Oh, you." He scowled at me. "Let's have it then."

  "I'd better see if it's okay, sir. If I could come up …"

  "Oh, sure."

  He led the way to the elevator.

  Reaching the third floor, he unlocked his front door and I followed him into the lounge.

  I tried the key in the safe door while he stood over me. A wild idea flashed into my mind that when I opened the safe door I'd turn on him, knock him out and help myself to his money, but I didn't do h. Instead, I relocked the safe and handed him the key.

  "It's okay, sir."

  "Right." He put the key in his pocket. "Thanks." He said it grudgingly and his hand went to his pocket, but that was as far as it went. I could read his mind. He had already given me two bucks. He was telling himself that was plenty.

  That little act of meanness decided me. For the past twenty-four hours I had been in two minds about taking his money, but I had only wanted an excuse to push me over the line. He had given it to me.

  I left him, took the elevator to the ground floor, waved to the doorman and went out into the rain.

  Roy was sitting in the truck, waiting for me.

  "Was that Cooper? The fat punk with the red face?"

  "That's him." I got into the truck beside Roy. "There's nothing to it," I went on as he drove the truck into the street "We can skin him on Sunday."

  We decided to do the job on Sunday because both of us were off duty then. Roy hired a car and we were set to go.

  It was a drowning wet night which was a good thing for us. The rain kept people off the streets, not that there were ever many people wandering around at one o'clock in the morning in this onehorse town.

  Roy picked me up at my place and we drove to the Ashley Arms, arriving there, as planned, at five minutes to one a.m.

  Roy slid the car between a Cadillac and a Packard in the private parking lot with about forty other cars left out in the rain.

  We sat side by side, watching the front entrance of the building. We were both pretty worked up. "I could hear Roy's breathing coming fast through his short, thick nose, and I wondered if he could hear my heart pounding.

  As the hands of the dashboard clock moved to the hour, we saw Cooper come out and cross over to a white Jaguar, parked ten yards fro
m where we waited. He came out, running, his head bent against the rain, and he didn't look our way. We watched him slide his bulk into the car and then drive off into the darkness.

  "That's one of them out of the way," Roy said. His voice sounded husky and unsteady.

  A few minutes later we saw the doorman close the glass doors of the main entrance and turn the key. We watched him through the glass doors walk across the lobby and disappear down the stairs to the basement.

"Let's go," Roy said and opened the car door.

  My heart was pounding so hard I was short of breath. I grabbed up my tool kit and slid out of the car. The rain felt cold against my face as I ran to the glass doors.

  We knew exactly what we had to do. I was to open the doors while Roy kept watch.

  There was a long drive-in to the block and the entrance couldn't be seen from the street. Unless someone living in the apartment block unexpectedly showed up, we were reasonably safe.

  I had trouble with the lock of the glass doors. In an ordinary way, I would have fixed it in three or four seconds, but my hands were shaking. I finally got the doors open as Roy began to curse me.

  He joined me as I pushed open the doors and we walked silently and quickly to the stairs. We had decided not to use the elevator in case the doorman hadn't gone to bed and wondered who was around.

  We walked up the stairs. We didn't meet anyone. Both of us were panting when we reached Cooper's front door.

  This time I had no trouble with the lock. The first key I tried unlocked it.

  I pushed open the door and stepped into the dark hall. Roy crowded in after me. For some moments we stood motionless, listening. We heard only a clock ticking somewhere and the occasional rumble of the refrigerator in the kitchen.

  "Come on! come on!" Roy said. "What are we waiting for?"

  I moved into the lounge and turned on the light

  Roy followed me and shut the door.

  "He certainly knows how to live, doesn't he?" he said as he looked around. "Where's the safe?"

  I went over to the fat nude and swung aside the frame. I spun the dial, setting the combination. Then using the key I had cut when I had cut Cooper's duplicate key, I unlocked the safe and pulled open the door.

  "Take a look!"

  Side by side, we stood staring at the neatly stacked piles of hundred dollar bills.

  "Gee!" Roy's fingers gripped my arm. "This'll put us on easy street for the rest of our lives!"

  Then we both heard a sound that froze us: the unmistakable sound of a key being pushed into a lock and the lock snapping.

  I was so scared I couldn't move. I just managed to turn my head to stare at the closed door, but the rest of me was paralysed.

  But not Roy.

  For a split second, he remained frozen, then he became alive. He slid away from me with the quickness of a lizard. He snapped off the light as the door pushed open.

  The light from the hall fell into the darkened room, making a rectangle of hard white light in which I stood.

  Standing in the doorway was the long legged blonde. For maybe a second we stared at each other.

  Then she started back and let out a scream that went through my head like a red hot wire.

  "There's someone in here!" she yelled. "It's a burglar!"

  Cooper's bulky frame loomed up behind her. He pushed her aside and came storming into the darkened room.

  All this happened so fast I was still standing in front of the open safe, scared silly and unable to move.

  The girl bolted out of the apartment and started down the stairs, screaming like a train whistle.

  I could see Roy's dim outline as he pressed himself against the wall by the door. As Cooper came into the room, he didn't see Roy. He was glaring at me and his hands were extended as if he were going to grab me by the throat Roy moved silently. I saw him swing the heavy crowbar we had brought with us in case we had trouble with the locks. He slammed it down on Cooper's head as Cooper made a grab at me.

  Cooper went down like a felled ox. His clawed fingers scraped down the front of my coat as he fell.

  "Quick!" Roy gasped. "Out!"

  We could hear the girl screaming as she bolted down the stairs.

  I rushed to the door.

  "Chet!" Roy's voice came behind me in a hiss of fear. "Not down! Up!"

  But I was already on the stairs, going down. My mind was frozen with panic. I had only one thought—to get out into the open and to get away.

  "Chet!"

  I heard him, but I kept on. I reached the second floor and started a blind rush to the head of the stairs. An apartment door facing me opened, and a thin, white haired scared looking man peered out. We glared at each other, then he hurriedly slammed the door shut I took the next flight of stairs in three thudding jumps, lost my balance and sprawled on the landing. I struggled to my feet and dived frantically down the last flight of stairs into the lobby.

  The long legged blonde was crouching by the doorman's office door. She stared in horror at me, her red lips parted and this nerve jarring scream coming out of her.

  The doorman, in shirt and trousers, his hair standing on end, came charging up from the basement and flung himself at me. We went down together in a heaving, thrashing assortment of arms and legs.

  I hit him about the head and body and I took a couple of stiff pokes in the face before I threw him off. I staggered up and made a dive for the door.

  As I got it open, the doorman began blowing a police whistle. This whistle and the girl's screams made an inferno of sound that galvanised me into the rain.

  I ran down the drive into the street. I could still hear the girl's screams, but the piercing blast of the police whistle rose above any noise she could make.

  With my heart pounding and sweat running down my face, I bolted down the street. I heard a man's voice yell after me. I looked back to see a shadowy outline of a man in a peak cap, pounding down the street after me.

  I kept on running, then I heard the bang of a gun. Something that sounded like a hornet zipped past my face.

  I dodged frantically and darted across the street to where it was darker.

  The gun banged again. I felt a giant's hand thump on my back and I sprawled face down in the road. White hot pain bit into me. I tried to roll over, but the pain paralysed me. The last thing I remembered before I blacked out was the sound of pounding feet coming towards me.

  CHAPTER TWO

  I

  I became aware of voices, out of focus, coming from a long way off: voices whispering to me from the end of a mile-long tunnel.

  Then I became aware of a hot, dull ache in the middle of my chest, a pain that grew as I slowly climbed out of the dark pit into which I had fallen.

  I half opened my eyes.

  White walls surrounded me. There was a dim shape of a man bending over me. He didn't come into focus, and as the pain bit into me more sharply, I shut my eyes.

  But my mind was now active. I remembered the rush down the three flights of stairs, the fight with the doorman, the wild terrified screams of the long-legged blonde and my blind, stupid rush into the street. I heard again the two bangs from the cop's gun.

  Well, I was caught. My futile attempt to grab some easy money had finished in a hospital bed with a cop standing over me.

  "If he's not all that badly hurt," a voice said suddenly, "why can't I shake the punk and snap him out of it?"

  A tough, hard cop voice you hear on the movies and can never imagine ever talking that way to you.

  "He'll come out of it," another voice said. "No point in rushing things, sergeant. He's had a lucky escape. Another inch to the right and he would have been a dead man."

  "Yeah? I bet he'll wish he was dead by the time I'm through with him."

  I was alert now and I peered at the two men standing by my bed. One of them was soft and fat and in a white overall: he would be the croaker. The other was a big man, fleshy with a red bluntfeatured face, small hard eyes and a mouth like a razor cut. His shabby, dark clothes and the way he wore his hat told me who he was: he was a cop, the owner of the tough voice.

  I lay still, riding the pain in my chest I began to wonder what had happened to Roy.

  He hadn't panicked the way I had. He had gone up the stairs while I had rushed blindly down into the arms of the law. Had he got away?

  Unless he had been seen leaving the building, he was in the clear. I was the one who had been caught I was t
he one who had seen the money in Cooper's safe. I was the one who had talked to the doorman about Cooper's movements. I was the one who had been seen running down the stairs. Roy was out of all this.

  Then I remembered the sound the crowbar had made as Roy had slammed it down on Cooper's head. It had been a terrible blow: made terrible by a viciousness I hadn't expected to be in Roy.

  I experienced a sudden feeling of sick fear. What had happened to Cooper? Had Roy killed him?

  Then I became aware of the smell of stale sweat and tobacco smoke so close that I opened my eyes and found myself staring up into the cop's red, brutal face.

  We were alone. I hadn't heard the doctor leave, but he must have gone, for he wasn't in the room.

  The cop grinned at me, showing his tobacco-stained teeth. It was like a wolf grinning at me.

  "Okay, punk," he said "Let's have it. I've been waiting two days and nights to talk to you. Let's have it."

  That was the beginning of it.

  They seemed to have a vague idea I hadn't done the job alone. They had nothing to go on, but they kept at me, trying to find out if I had had someone with me. I said no, and I kept on saying no.

  They told me Cooper was dying and I would be up on a murder charge. If I had had someone working with me, now was the time to spill it. I told them I had handled the job alone.

  Finally, they got tired of trying to make me admit I wasn't alone. Finally, too, they had to tell me that Cooper was recovering. They seemed pretty sore that he was going to recover.

  "But you could have killed him," the sergeant with the tobacco-stained teeth told me, "and that'll make an impression on the judge. You'll get ten years for this, punk, and you'll regret every one of them."

  From the hospital I was transferred to the State Jail. I remained there for three months while they got Cooper into good enough shape to give evidence against me.

  I'll remember the trial for as long as I live.

  When I was brought into the court room, I looked around. The first person I spotted in the spectators' gallery was Janey. That surprised me. She waved her hand at me and I managed somehow to smile in return. She was the last person I expected to see there.

  Then there was Franklin, my boss at the Lawrence Safes Corporation, and sitting by his side was Roy.

  Roy and I looked at each other for a brief moment. Roy looked pale and thin. I imagined he had been sweating it out during those three months, wondering if I were going to give him away.

  The judge was a little guy with a thin, mean face and stony eyes.

  I didn't stand a chance of beating the rap.

  Cooper, much thinner, with his head in bandages, told how I had come to open the safe and how he had asked me for a duplicate key.

  The long-legged blonde got onto the witness stand. She had on a sky blue dress that showed off her curves in a way that had every man in the court room, including the judge, staring at her.

  She explained that she sang at one of Cooper's clubs and from rime to time she visited his apartment to discuss with him the songs she wanted to sing. Everyone in court knew why she visited Cooper's apartment at one o'clock in the morning, and you could see by the way they looked at Cooper how much they envied him. She said Cooper had been out of the room when I had opened the safe. She said she saw me look inside the safe, then shut the door and pretend I hadn't opened it.

  Cooper told the judge how he had found me in front of the open safe. He said when he had closed with me, I had hit him on the head with an iron bar.

  Franklin surprised me by coming forward and speaking for me. He said I was the best workman they had, and up to now they had always found me completely trustworthy. But he was wasting his breath. I could see he made as much impression on the judge as a handful of grit thrown at an armoured truck.

  My attorney, a well-fed, middle-aged chisler, seemed to have trouble in keeping awake. After he had heard the evidence for the prosecution, he looked over at me, grimaced, got slowly to his feet and announced that his client—that was me—now pleaded guilty and threw himself on the mercy of the court. Maybe there wasn't anything else he could do, but I felt at least he might have made it sound as if he were sorry. The way he said it, I and everyone in the court got the impression he was already concentrating on his next case.

  The judge stared at me for several sadistic moments. Finally he said I had committed a breach of trust. In my particular job a man had to be trustworthy. I had endangered the reputation of an old-established firm where my grandfather and my father had served as faithful servants. He said that as this was my first offence he had been tempted to treat me leniently. He didn't kid me for one moment. I could tell by his hard little eyes that he was talking for the sake of hearing his own voice. He said my brutal, savage attack on Cooper—an attack that might have ended in a murder charge—had placed me beyond the mercy of the court. He then sentenced me to ten years' penal servitude. I would be sent to the Farnworth Prison Camp where they would know how to deal with a man of my viciousness.

  That was the moment when I was tempted to betray Roy, and he knew it. I turned to look at him and our eyes met. He was tense and sitting bolt upright. He knew what was going on in my mind. He knew I had only to point to him and tell the judge he was the man who had hit Cooper for me to get off the hook for at least a couple of months for a new trial, and maybe, if it could be proved that Roy had hit Cooper, for me not to go to Farnworth.

  Farnworth was a notorious chain gang prison farm, some two hundred miles in the interior, and had been the subject of a number of newspaper articles over the past three years when public spirited journalists had called on the authorities to close the camp, which they described as the nearest thing to a Nazi concentration camp as made no difference.

  I had read the articles, and like a lot of people, I had been shocked by what I had read. If the newspaper men were telling the truth, the conditions at Farnworth were as horrible as they were disgraceful.

  The thought of serving ten years in that hell-hole made my blood run cold.

  Roy and I looked at each other. As we stared at each other, I remembered a lot of small, unimportant things he had done for me when we had been at school together and when we had worked together. I remembered his jeering, friendly sympathy when my girl friends had let me down. I remembered the long talks we had had together and the plans we had made if we ever got hold of some money. It was those things that made it impossible for me to betray him. I gave him a grin: it wasn't much of a grin, but at least it told him he was safe.

  I felt a heavy hand of one of the cops who had stood by my side during the trial drop on my arm.

  "Get moving," the cop said under his breath.

  I looked at Janey, who was sobbing into her handkerchief. I looked at Roy again, then I went down the steps out of sight of the court, out of the world of freedom into a future that held no hope for me. The only thought that kept me going while I waited to be taken to Farnworth was that I hadn't betrayed Roy.

  That thought helped me to keep my self-respect: and because of where I was going, that was something I just had to hang onto.

  II

  Farnworth wasn't a prison of high walls and cells. It was a prison of chains, sharp-shooting guards and savage dogs.

  If the days were terrible, the nights were worse. At the end of each day, seventy-seven stinking, unwashed men were herded like cattle into a bunk-house fifty feet long and ten feet wide with one small barred window and an iron-studded door. Each man was shackled to a chain that circled the bunkhouse. He was shackled in such a way that whenever he moved the other men were jerked awake by the communal chain tightening.

  After a day in the burning sun, working until every bone in your body ached, the slightest irritation became intolerable. Often when a man was restless in his sleep and jerked the chain, his neighbour struck at him, and vicious fights were continually breaking out in the stifling darkness.

  Once we were locked in the bunk-house, the guards left us alone
until the morning. They didn't care how many fights broke out, and if anyone got murdered, it meant just one less for them to bother about.

  There were only twelve guards to look after the prisoners. At night they went off duty with the exception of one man. This man, Byefleet by name, was in charge of the dogs. There was something so savage and primitive about him that even the dogs were scared of him.

  The dogs were kept in a big steel pen during the day and they were kept short of food. They were as dangerous as tigers.

  At seven o'clock each night, the prisoners were chained to their bunks and the guards went off duty. It was then Byefleet, a giant of a man, fat, with the face of a pig, came into his kingdom. Carrying a baseball club, he would go to the steel pen and let the dogs out.